i was in mexico with the cia in the 60s
and they had a vast operation going
there
and especially in their penetrations and
work with the mexican security services
and
in fact it started with the president in
mexico our operations
very close relationship with three
successive presidents lopez mateos diaz
or dawson
when it comes to mexico and this this
zapatista movement
there's not a doubt in my mind that
they're in chapters they've been there
since day one i'm sure the national
intelligence service
known as sin which the cia which the cia
established in 86 or 87
as a national service to be used against
the narcotics trade
coming through haiti in the caribbean
and that area
which in fact turned into a narcotics
dealing organization
as they always do or often do
afghanistan is not an arab country but
they had a lot of volunteers
islamic fundamentalists from the arab
countries who went as volunteers to
fight
in afghanistan they were they they were
volunteers from algeria from morocco
from all of north africa egypt to
sudan and other arab countries and they
went there as volunteers
and they fought first they were trained
in
in how to handle the weapons and so
forth by in these camps
provided by the cia and then they saw
action on the front lines
well when it was over these they're
called afghanis
in their home countries because they've
gone off to as volunteers
even though they're from arab countries
so these afghanistan so-called afghanis
they went back and then they
started to foment fundamentalist
revolution in their own country so you
see what's happening in egypt or in
algeria right now this algerian civil
war has
taken 30 35 000 lives they say but this
is
being run and the some of the main
forces there have served in
afghanistan with the bill ticket from
the cia
and the training and so forth same thing
in egypt with the
so-called islamic group there and of
these people who were tried in new york
on the two cases you know won the world
trade center bombing and the other the
conspiracy
trial for the tunnels and you know i
think half of those were
trained in afghanistan phil agee was a
cia officer
for 12 years serving mainly in latin
america
he quit the agency and wrote his best
seller
inside the company he will share his
experiences and insights with us
right now on alternative views
[Music]
[Applause]
hey
[Music]
[Applause]
this is a program i've been wanting to
do on alternative views for 17 years
and that is have an interview with
former cia officer phil agee
now we have had some programs with phil
you have seen some speeches that he has
given that we've had copies of and
presented them to you and on the
documentary on company business
but this is our first chance to actually
talk with him in person
phil was in the cia for 12 years and
then
quit after he saw what the cia was
actually doing all the terrible things
doing in the areas where he was
working particularly in ecuador mexico
and
uruguay he resigned in 1969
to write his first big book
inside the company or cia diary since
then he's written
five books the last one being on the run
which tells about his experiences after
he got out of the cia
when he was in europe and trying to
write his book and the cia was hounding
him from
country to country doing everything he
could to
keep him from writing this book well
phil we're
so pleased that you can finally be with
us i'm very happy to be here
very happy to be here you've had
such an association with the cia both
positive and negative for so many years
let's start out by talking about where
the cia is today they say they want to
do intelligence
gathering on economic subjects rather
than political etc like they had in the
past what do you think about that
well i think that that's a normal
activity
they've been doing that since the
beginning to speak of it as something
new
is really inaccurate
in this context of all this talk about
economic and financial and commercial
intelligence collection
as a new role for the agency i
got out a document which was sent to me
anonymously
in nineteen seventy six twenty years ago
practically
and this document was it was the
list of the what they call key
intelligence questions for nineteen
seventy five in this
very field economic commercial financial
intelligence
also high-tech developments and all
in the developed countries all in allies
like the nato allies and
japan and this is a was an innovation of
william colby
when he came into the cia in 1973. he
tried to systematize and organ
organize the foreign intelligence
collection process
and for 1975 there were
i think 69 key intelligence questions
and these are actually questions
with some detail and then there's a
whole discussion of them that follows
from 1-69 but these were only on this
document there were only the
the nine which deal with economic and
commercial and financial matters
and i got that out in and it calls for
great great detail
on all of these matters including the
negotiating positions
the fallback positions on such
negotiations as
the general agreements on tariffs and
trade now the wto
and all of it was in its most important
parts spying on allies
and the state department was supposed to
get this type of information the cia
would get it
get it in its way secretly or through
some kind of technical means or through
agents
and so i just point that document out
that's 20 years ago
and they were doing it for 20 years
before that i would assume then they
would turn this information
over to the corporations the
multinational corporations
that i can't be sure of they would
send it in of course to the analysts and
they would then be preparing reports for
use within the government
in the commerce department you know and
in within the white house and the
national security council
and its staff but the decision to turn
it over to
commercial companies or multinationals
is something which um
i i can't really say that they did that
then but we did help the multinationals
in different ways from time to time to
time my very first job
in the cia after the training program
was to
i was assigned to the latin american
division to the venezuela
desk and my job it was it was so boring
i had to do name checks and a name check
is where you get a name from
in this case caracas our office in
caracas in the embassy
and you you make a request for all the
records on this particular person
from the records integration division or
rid
that's where the files were and then you
were looking for anything
uh negative politically negative in
other words or
derogatory it happened that these lists
of names that i was getting
uh every week were given to us in
caracas by the chief of security of
creole petroleum and creole petroleum
you know was the largest
overseas subsidiary of esso or now exxon
of standard oil of new jersey
in other words and so we were performing
this um
security check in order to help them
keep
political undesirables out of employment
because these were people who were
prospective employees for creole and so
we were doing these checks on
venezuelans actually
and serving the interests of of
of this enormous standard oil
exxon xso subsidiary
abroad this is one example and i can
tell you
when i got out of that job i was very
happy because it's just
boring you can imagine to try to go
through all these different records and
look for something that might be
derogatory and then
have to write it back and and the first
name i got was jose diaz
and didn't even have a date of birth so
you can imagine how many how many files
i had on jose diaz
is the most common team
well this is when they say they're going
to start doing
economic intelligence now and helping
out the
quote u.s unquote corporations they've
really been doing that all along
just kind of taking the mask off of it
because everywhere
they have the cia has actually been
making
the that particular country safe and
profitable for the multinational
corporations and local elites yes
everything goes back to that and as a
matter of fact
this intervention abroad for stability
for the
optimum operating conditions for
us-based multinationals is something
that
predates even certainly world war
ii and um in some respects you could say
it even predates the bolshevik
revolution because it's
more than 100 years now that that the
leadership in this country has
understood that there's no way to
preserve the system in this
country without foreign markets
for surplus production without foreign
labor
cheap labor and without the cheapest
possible national national
natural resources and this is something
which had been going on for 100 years
all through the cold war and so it is
something that's going to continue
for the future but in this economic and
commercial area there have been two
cases this year
of operations that went bad one was in
france in february
when the french government caught the c
i a trying to
recruit people in the french government
for secret information
on french negotiating positions within
the world trade organization
context and they they ordered five cia
people out of the country
that was the news at that time in
february four of them including the
chief of station were in the embassy
undercover as diplomats you know
and then there was a fifth one a woman
who was outside the embassy she was
under some non-official cover
i don't know what that was but that was
the news at that time and then it came
comes out much later just a few weeks
ago that as a result of this and of the
of the reaction of the french government
the strong reaction to this attempt to
penetrate their government the whole cia
operation
in paris in france was shut down
including whatever they were doing
against international terrorism the
narcotics trade and so forth
that's one case that went bad on them
this year another one that went bad just
a few weeks ago was the
leakage to the press which wasn't
eventually confirmed
it's true the cia was spying on the
japanese negotiators last summer in the
trade
the auto talks you know how we're trying
to get into their market and so forth
and
the cia was monitoring the
communications i believe
of the japanese negotiators and the
appropriate ministry and also the
companies themselves
so that our side that's um
the mickey cantor side would
have a better knowledge of what they
would accept and what they wouldn't
accept
and so this has soured relations with
japan also
so when you get into this area of spying
on your allies
you're asking for a lot of trouble and
whether they give that to the companies
or not
it's difficult to say i can't tell you
of course they've been doing this type
we've talked about the japanese they've
been doing that type of
monitoring of communications and for for
years for decades
this is nothing new i guess it just now
came out yes and
as i mentioned it went goes back at
least 20 years and 20 years before that
but
one area that ought not to be forgotten
is cuba
because there is a 35-year economic
blockade going
against cuba still and there are those
people who are trying to
intensify this and broaden it still more
now
the cia without the slightest doubt
has the requirement in every country
to report on any possible trade deals
that cuba may be interested in making or
investment in cuba now that the country
has opened up
and the cia has got to collect this
information so that
measures can be taken to
to sabotage these possible
deals of interest and benefit to cuba
i was there last year and i was in a
meeting
being addressed by roberto robaina he is
the foreign minister
very young hip guy and he was telling us
that of every 10 possible deals they
have for investment in cuba or for trade
and
the united states is able to squash
nine and so they know perfectly well
that every move they make as they go
around the world
in in trade negotiations or in seeking
investment
for whatever in cuba they are being
followed and watched
under a microscope so that some measure
can be taken it could be the ambassador
with the local government it could be
any way they can approach the person and
put the pressure on
there's a good example of this for
example the soviets built a large
petroleum refinery very near sienfuegos
which is the main city on the south
coast
this was never put into operation before
the collapse of the soviet union and um
then there were there was a diminution
in trade and the
cubans finally convinced or made a deal
with the ecuadorians
who which are one of the principal
exporting countries
and they were to bring the petroleum
from ecuador to
cuba to this refinery refine the
products and re-export
leaving behind a certain amount of of
production
to pay for the use of the refinery this
was going to be a great deal for cuba
because they have an energy crisis this
terrible
the united states was able to put the
fist down on ecuador and it fell through
so the cubans made a deal with the
venezuelans because eventually you know
they they nationalized creole and
saw the national industry now the
venezuelans then were going to bring
the petroleum to this refinery and
re-export leaving
surplus production behind for the cubans
the same thing happened
bang the venezuelans had to withdraw
so the cubans went to the mexicans and
the mexicans resisted
and now they are putting it into
operation so
it's not hopeless but you see how the
united states is going around in these
areas of economics and of trade and of
commerce
and finance to try to
make the cuban people suffer as much as
they can
and this is affecting in a drastic way
very young children and infants and also
the older
in other words the most vulnerable and
it is a it is an
eternal shame on the united states in my
opinion that we would do such a thing to
an entire country
just because we don't like the system
just because they won't come under our
protection basically it's a kind of a
mafia
attitude and it has been that way since
eisenhower
well that's capitalism well it's also
the united states and
our tradition of being very nervous
when we don't control something and when
a country like cuba
slips out from under our control after
we had
ruled it practically as a neo-colony or
a protectorate
for 59 years or so
then it makes people nervous because
they know that
if the cubans are successful in their
example
of being able to provide as a poor
country
the best medical care in the third world
to the whole population
because it's an inclusion inclusionary
system it's not like we have here
where you have this huge bulk of the
population you know marginalize them
but there if everybody can have adequate
medical care
if the schooling is adequate for all and
remember cuba has
more doctors and more teachers per
capita than any country in the world
and they have succeeded in these areas
and it's all state
supported which means people don't have
to put money out for for the medical
care or
for it's in they of course pay the cost
indirectly as a whole society but they
don't have to pay the bill
at the hospital and so forth and so that
cannot be allowed to stand it's a very
bad example
for the united states and for all the
third world people in the united states
after all we're becoming a third world
country very fast
if not already you've not already and so
there's a
very large mass of people out there who
can look at cuba and say
well if they can do it and on a
per capita income of two thousand two
thousand five hundred dollars a year
where ours is twenty two thousand five
hundred dollars a year
what's wrong with what's wrong with our
system i mean maybe we
ought to consider an alternative
that's why nicaragua sound in eastern
nicaragua had to be destroyed
exactly they were a bad example and
that's why grenada had to be destroyed
because any
movement that comes to power with the
idea of providing for all the people
and of escaping the control of the
united states
and its economy let's say the
corporations and so forth
then that is bad news here in the united
states in the upper
circles of power and influence and so
in nicaragua i watched it from the very
beginning i was often there and
it was it was a very sad side
to see the hopes at the beginning and
the
the euphoria with the overthrow of this
u.s installed dictatorship from the 30s
on
samosa and all the hopes for expanding
education
and the literacy program they adopted
right at the beginning it's
similar to what the cubans did health
health as well all of those things cuban
doctors were in there
they were setting up clinics clinics all
over the international solidarity
movement was
was just tremendous for nicaragua in
those early years and
naturally the united states could not
let that stand
and the economic system was working they
had the
highest greatest expansion of
of their national gross national product
of any country
in the western hemisphere at that time
that's right that was in the early years
but then
you know the cia started to reorganize
using argentine
military officers who had worked in this
really
it's hard to find words for the the
argentines you know in the 70s uh the
dirty war there
but these military people from argentina
were taken by the cia put to work in
honduras reorganizing the remnants of
the
of the somos national guard and then it
became
a a huge terrorist operation
and as a matter of fact at the by the
end when
when the killing was was stopping
in the late 1980s they had killed
something like 35 000 people
and that's one percent of the population
of nicaragua the comparable figure for
the united states would be
what two 2.5 million people killed over
an eight nine year period
i mean that's more than were killed in
all the wars that the united states ever
fought
i checked it out once and uh it would be
a catastrophe can you imagine if
something happened to this country where
2.5 million people were killed well it
means in nicaragua there's not a family
that
was untouched i mean uh and and they
have a huge number of
amputees now in in nicaragua and a very
large program for
getting um prosthetics for these people
because of the landmines that the
countries
put around and they're still they don't
you know they still haven't gotten
all out of the ground same thing
happened in angola exactly angola's got
the very same problem
you know it's well it's where the cia
goes if it happens in one place it's
going to happen in another
the cias more or less
intimate said well they're out of the
covert action business anymore
but i read recently where they're down
in chiapas helping the government fight
the rebels there there's not a doubt in
my mind that they're in champions
they've been there since day one i'm
sure
and they mexico is just too important to
the united states to leave it to the
mexicans
you know what i mean and i was in mexico
with the c.i.a
in the 60s and they
had a vast operation going there and
especially in their
penetrations and work with the mexican
security services and in fact it started
with the president
in mexico our operations very close
relationship with three
successive presidents lopez mateos diaz
or dawson
when it comes to mexico and this this
sapotista movement
what they have to worry about i think is
not just the armed movement in chapas of
these
this armed force of the ezln
but as an inspiration they
they triggered the development of a huge
support network popular movement all
over the country
which has come together to support their
demands and the demands are are really
not
outrageous at all no they're not they're
not outrageous and the societies
themselves i could not believe this that
they say
we do not want power i mean that's the
first
guerrilla organization i think that has
ever said that the idea always was to
take power
and then impose or establish or
reorganize do whatever you want to do
but
they say no we just want to have
democracy in this country
and we want to get the uh pre out
and the pre is of course is so
unpopular now it's it's it's carrying on
through its
it's a patronage system you know that's
been in
power for a long time so in mexico i
think they have a
much bigger problem than just the armed
movement
in chiapas but it is spread all over the
country and nobody can tell where this
is going to
lead the asafoetida you know had this in
this referendum
back in august and september and they
had it not only in
mexico this was a referendum on a number
of questions
on the direction in which the people
would like to see the country move
and how they would like to see the
southeastern themselves develop
whether they should convert themselves
into a
an independent political movement and
they had international people i voted in
the thing too because i'm sitting over
there in germany reading every day
through my computer
the latest happenings in chiapas and all
over mexico
and so i'm actually very interested i
voted on all these questions there are a
whole series of questions
and people i think they had 80 or 100
000 people outside mexico
who took part in this referendum and
there were several million in mexico who
what did you send out questionnaires to
people all around the country well
in in my case all the questions came on
through the computer
through the net and i sent my vote back
through the net
and in mexico they organized tables all
over the
country and people went and and voted
on their preferences according to this
list of questions
so you can be very sure that the cia
is in there in a very big way i imagine
they're in there with special forces
of the united states army right in
chiapas
they are doing communications monitoring
i'm sure of all the
transmissions of the zapatistas and uh
monitoring the people who come and go
you know the mexican army has tried to
make put a ring around
the area controlled by the the ezln and
it's a it's a very fascinating scene
to watch but when you talk about going
back to your comment about covered
action in the
1990s there are some very interesting
things that have come out
for example even though the cold war is
over that does not mean that the united
states is going to settle for democracy
in any particular country
they never have and the litany is quite
long you know
starting from the 50s of
democratic processes what is accepted
here as legitimate electoral process and
pluralistic political parties and so
forth when that goes against us interest
they do
don't kill they don't care i mean it's
not a matter of principle for them
the principle is what's good for us yeah
without faith what's that famous remark
that kissinger made about
the situation in chile oh we shouldn't
stand by
because of the irresponsibility of the
chilean people
and at the same time zen nixon was
telling the cia to make the chilean
economy scream
but what has happened now in the 1990s
is that
in 1990 bulgaria the bulgarian communist
party the former communists they renamed
themselves as the bulgarian socialist
party
and they won the 1990 elections
in the sense that they took 211 of the
400 seats in the
parliament do you think that the united
states accepted that
all these international observers were
there from western europe and other
places
and they all said this was absolutely
free and fair there was no fraud at all
that we could detect but the united
states didn't accept that
and so nowadays instead of having just
the cia going around behind the scenes
and trying to manipulate the
process secretly by inserting money here
and instructions there and so forth
they have now a sidekick which is this
national endowment for democracy
and this organization dates from 1967.
a lot of people don't realize because it
was just established in i think 83
or so but the idea
emerged from a series of scandalous
revelations in 1967 the worst ones
to that point to hit the cia and i was
in headquarters at the time that these
scandals broke and the gloom there was
something you could
you could touch almost because what
happened was
the the long-running cia's
control and manipulation of the
international program of the national
students association in this country
which was the national organization of
university students
came out it was revealed
and that led to revelations of a lot of
other c
i a operations because they were using
the same bogus and real foundations to
channel money into all these different
overseas organizations
and i remember very well that time
magazine at the time or newsweek i think
it was time
they published a wheel with all these
spokes
going out and the cia was it's the
center and then halfway out where all
these
these corporate these foundations and
american organizations and then out at
the end were the
foreign groups that got the money and
the instructions naturally they don't
give
away money without being sure that it's
spent the way they want to spend
and so this was a catastrophe for the
cia and the next month or the month
after that
this started in february 67 and then by
april i think it was donte fachel
the congressman from florida was
proposing the establishment of a
an open system to finance these overseas
organizations
and we're talking about some government
organizations abroad
some political parties some media
organizations youth organizations and
student organizations
all these kinds of of so-called
pluralist organizations
when in fact they weren't really free
organizations for because to the degree
that they take money and
instructions from the c i a to that
degree they're not free at all
right but anyway fascia came up with
this idea
but nothing it didn't go anywhere
because the
so-called consensus between the two
parties had broken down over vietnam
and so it wasn't until the early
eighties when reagan made a speech in
the house of commons
about the democracy project worldwide
that this began to take on steam again
and finally they decided to copy the
german example
each of the major german political
parties has a foundation
which is financed by the german
government
before it was west germany now the whole
country and
for example the friedrich ebert stiftung
is the
sbd or the social democratic party's
foundation and they finance projects all
over the place and for years in the 50s
and 60s and
i would guess even into the seventies in
fact i know into the seventies
even to the early eighties the cia was
channeling money through these german
foundations
abroad for example some money a lot of
money i think it was a million dollars
in war
but i'm i'm a little hazy on the amount
but anyway it went through the it was
cia money who which went through the
conrad adenauer stifle
that's the christian democratic union it
went from there to evil which is
a foundation of the copay the christian
democrats in venezuela
and from there it went to the christian
democrats in el salvador
to duarte for use in the elections i've
forgotten which year maybe 84 or
something like that and
it was traced some journalists did this
and
so that is the way they would use these
german foundations in the past
so now we've got our own we don't have
to use the germans unless we really want
to anymore
because in 1984 we established this
national endowment for democracy which
is nothing but a mega conduit
and the millions or the tens of millions
that
are set aside for the meddling in the
internal affairs of other countries goes
to this
conduit like a bank account or something
but they have a board of directors and
they
do reports and stuff like that but then
it goes from there to
one of four private foundations
one of the democratic party one the
republican party or two
three the afl-cio and for the
u.s chamber of commerce these groups
then
pass it out to recipients in foreign
countries
and in the nicaraguan elections of 1990
i believe the figure was something like
12.5
million that went from the national
endowment for democracy
through these conduits to the uno
political movement there uh it was the
party
the coalition you know of uno which is
the most ungodly coalition
you can ever make everything from
communists all the way that's right
that's right and then they had a trade
front trade union front
uh which also received money and then
they had the civic association
civic association i think they call it
the civica there
um that's a that's an old old
uh technique of the cia is to
establish a a a type of civic
organization which will be involved in
monitoring elections and things like
that
and the first one that i know of was nam
frail in the philippines
they established that one around 1950-51
as part of the counter-insurgency
against the hux
the the guerrilla movement of the time
because we wanted to have a vehicle for
electing our man president of the
philippines and we did it through this
organization then
landfall stands for national association
for free elections i think
and yeah free elections when we were
financing
and namthrow was very successful
and our man ramon magsaysay was elected
president i think it was 70
52-53 and unfortunately he was killing
plane crash
57 and so then we switched to marcos and
various other
people like that but nonethrel never
never
faded away and in 1986
remember the elections of 1986 which
marcos tried to steal
well namthrow was alive and well and
they were the ones who
denounced the fraud by marcos
and they then inspired the movement of
people power
which forced him to resign and brought
corey aquino in as president
so now i'm sorry i was alive and well
they tried to copy it in panama
they sent the president of the chamber
of commerce in the early 80s um or
84 or there more or less in preparation
for the 87 elections i think it was
they sent him out to panama to study the
way namfo worked
so he could come back to panama and
establish another one there
and so he did in panama it was called
crusader civica
or civic crusade and this was what
was used against the
noriega forces in the streets it became
what they call robbie blanca there
you know the the upper class white
people in panama was one of those
organizations but they did
take to the streets and um you can
remember the the pictures on the covers
of the magazines you know when they had
the riots and
noriega was not overthrown then but they
tried everything in panama
the cia was running candidates of its
own all through the 1980s trying to get
noriega out maybe not all through the
80s no
they his his utility ended about 86 87.
because he was working with the ceo yes
yes it was important for the contra
operation
in uh in nicaragua but by 87 everybody
knew that the cultures were not going to
do anything they weren't going anywhere
militarily
and noriega's importance was in allowing
panama to be used for training them
and also for resupply but that was over
by 87
and that's when the efforts began to to
get him
aside leading to the invasion 89 but
they were up to here in panamanian
politics and i'm sure they are
using these different types of
organizations so the cover action
operations
go on and as a matter of fact in not
only in bolivia in
bulgaria did they overturn this
government
i didn't even finish that story but what
happened is all this money from
national endowment for democracy went in
and they fomented
student strikes and demonstrations trade
union strikes
massive street protests and
not only was the money put in by the
national endowment for democracy but
also
paul weyrich's free congress foundation
all got involved and this is part of the
christian right you know he's the man
who runs all these different
organizations out of the same address in
washington d.c
and uh this free congress foundation
also got going in there
uh and i guess in coordination with what
the cia was doing what ned was
doing and so forth and so the elections
were in june
the communists said or the former
communists had won by the end of
november they were out
because they made the country
ungovernable 1991 they did the same
thing albania
they had elections there free fair no
fraud former communist won
the united states got in there through
these different organizations and the
cia naturally
and they made albania ungovernable chile
same thing
same chili same thing brazil in the
early 60s same thing we did i did this
we were doing the same thing when i was
in ecuador in fact we had two
coups uh two unconstitutional changes of
government when i was there and
they were largely due to what we were
doing and by the time i left
after three years we had what we wanted
a four-man military
dictatorship that was carrying on a
very strong repression against the left
what's the situation in haiti now that's
a little bit different situation than
say nicaragua was well haiti is another
example of
1990s operations aristide you know
elected with two-thirds of the
vote in 1990 takes office in early 1991
he's thrown out in september
and there's strong strong evidence that
the cia was
was pushing this because aristide is not
the sort of man they
are comfortable dealing with you know no
he wants to elevate the
level of of the common people ordinary
people just like in nicaragua exactly he
comes from liberation theology and
that's always made the united states
quite nervous
yes because in 1968 at the
medellin bishops conference you know
they made this prefer
what they call the preferential option
for the poor and that was a historical
turning point for the catholic church in
latin america
i mean they'd already been doing very
good things certain people you know some
of the jesuits some of the others
and also doing awful things like in the
past associating themselves with the
oligarchies and so forth
but 68 and this uh decision by the
bishops conference
was really a major major event
and the liberation theology moved
forward very fast after that through the
christian-based communities you know
that they established all over latin
america
and these people were dedicated to
achieving social justice
one way or another and artistied comes
from that tradition
so anything like that makes people
nervous because
it means instability and i remember
so well all those years i was down there
working with the cia in latin america if
there was one
one thing we wanted and was our goal was
stability and just as important i guess
you could say the second one is
control and that's not possible when you
get uh
a movement which is clamoring for reform
and artisteed was
trying to help the poor of haiti and
reorganize the society that was his
program
along the lines of social justice and so
forth and so when that happens it makes
the united states very nervous and they
couldn't have him
and so they had to ask they had to ask
the generals to take over and not only
did they ask them to take over but
there's any number of reports and i
believe it
that the cia was paying these generals
running the military dictatorship over
that three-year period
that killed four five thousand people
and
i don't know if you've been following
alan naren's reporting in the nation
on haiti but he's doing wonderful just
wonderful work
he broke the story that
emmanuel toto constant who had been
teaching
on liberation theology in the national
intelligence service
known as sin which the c i a which the c
i a established in 86 or 87
as a national service to be used against
the narcotics trade
coming through haiti in the caribbean
and that area
which in fact turned into a narcotics
dealing organization
as they always do or often do but anyway
they set up sin
and toto was
teaching on liberation theology in sin
how bad it was naturally it was sinful
and so
he then is asked by the cia and the dia
who are working together there yes
that's right
after after the the coup
to form a a
let's say a militant action force to
balance the forces
of lava las that's the rsd
political movement and so they form the
front for
progress of haiti or something like that
it's known as frop
you know f-r-a-p-h
yeah and so anyway they he organizes
this
thing and the cia pays him to do it and
he's on payroll they're playing the
expenses and meanwhile these people are
killing thousands of
thousands of haitians all on our street
side natural
and it was it was just as dirty as you
can
imagine and there we were behind this
and this has covered action of the 1990s
i mean it's not like like rigging an
election or something it's
worse than that in terms of human cost
and
all this has come out thanks to the
digging of of alan niren
and the publication of his findings in
the nation magazine
so haiti is one of those countries which
um the united states
you know it's like the rotten apple
theory you know
noam chomsky talks about this all the
time you know if you get one rotten
apple in the barrel you know it's going
to spread to all the others
and so that's why they can't even allow
a haiti
as miserable as the country is to
reorganize for social justice it's it's
just
well another eternal shame on the united
states i guess
but now that aristide is back in they're
probably doing everything they can to
to defeat his forces and it's not
working
because in the elections that just were
held his
his party or his organization won the
parliament going away
they are in control of parliament now
and there will be a presidential
presidential election coming up perhaps
nobody seems to know because
there's a possibility that he might take
his extra three years you know and stay
on
the decision hasn't been made yet but i
think the
cia is going to stay in there in haiti
they're going to stay in mexico
they're going to do what they always did
communism never really was the problem
you know
it was never the problem in cuba it did
become a problem when
the united states the eisenhower
administration decided to overthrow the
revolution and turn the clock back to
the batista days
it did become a problem because then the
soviets got in there they got a base and
they got
troops and missile crisis and all that
but that was in reaction
that was all in reaction to the united
states aggression toward cuba towards
cuba and are installing
missiles all over the world aimed at the
soviet union
so i think that in the 1990s and beyond
we are going to see a lot more of this
stuff that we've known in the past
and one of the main reasons is that the
united states is imposing
this so-called neo-liberal economic
project
and that is also goes under different
names like free market and so forth
but it uh it results without fail and
it's imposed by the imf you know and by
the united states
bilaterally and world bank and all these
organizations wwto world trade
organization now and
it is imposed and it means in every
single case the marginalization of a
great mass of the society in a foreign
country these are
could be ten 20 40 of the population
who are redundant they're not needed
they're superfluous
because the industry that develops and
all the
economic development leaves these people
aside just like that is happening now
in the united states and is one of the
reasons why the extreme right movement
in the united states
is growing so fast but that means that
there's going to be resistance
and there will be people out there
organizing like the zapatistas for
example
and others in mexico organizing to
resist
and that means that there's a role for
the cia just like there was when
when guerrillas were operating in
bolivia or wherever
there's a role for the cia to collect
intelligence on them to penetrate them
divide weaken and destroy these forces
and so we're going to see this i think
just like in the past
the communist menace was a bogey anyway
in latin america and lots of other
places
and just look at what has happened with
the communist countries
take china big trading partner now
vietnam they're getting in there to try
to tap that 78 million
person market and they'll be doing it
eventually with cuba
but cuba is special they don't want to
lose
the idea of control in cuba and you have
these
cuban exiles here the jorge masses of
the day who want to go in there and
run the country take the burger king and
the mcdonald's
franchise and everywhere they go you
just
tick off a list of these countries that
have been subjected to
cia covert actions and you can just see
the the
trail of blood and and just horrible
things that have happened to the people
in the economy you look at nicaragua el
salvador guatemala
haiti vietnam well afghanistan
afghanistan afghanistan is absolute
absolute
chaos and mass the what you call in
spanish sequela the aftermath of
of the afghan intervention is
still going on today you read about it
in the paper every single day and the
numbers of people there have been killed
are astronomical the numbers of refugees
is
way up there in the millions and
all because of
a movement which took control in the
country back in the
in the eighties and which was going to
modernize afghanistan they were going to
change the status of women who until
that time were
men's chattels they were going to
educate women to read and write
and afghanistan at that time was was
living in the past
with just a few core sectors you know
which had the education in the west and
so forth
and the agency
got in there with the chinese and the
pakistanis
trying to support the opposition to this
social development program
before the communists took over in
afghanistan and before the soviets
intervened
but what is interesting to me is
in the aftermath how many of these
arab volunteers afghanistan is not an
arab country but they had a lot of
volunteers
islamic fundamentalists from the arab
countries who went as volunteers to
fight in afghanistan
in afghanistan they were they they were
volunteers from algeria from morocco
from all of north africa egypt to
sudan and other arab countries and they
went there as volunteers
and they fought first they were trained
in
how to handle the weapons and so forth
by in these camps
provided by the cia and then they saw
action on the front lines
well when it was over these they're
called afghanis
in their home countries because they've
gone off to as volunteers even though
they're from arab countries so these
afghanis
so-called afghanis they went back and
then they started to foment
fundamentalist revolution in their own
country so you see what's happening in
egypt or in algeria right now this
algerian civil war has
taken 30 35 000 lives they say but this
is
being run and some of the main forces
there have served in afghanistan
with the bill ticket from the cia and
the training and so forth
same thing in egypt with the so-called
islamic group there and of these people
who were tried in new york
on the two cases you know won the world
trade center bombing and the other the
conspiracy trial for the tunnels and you
know
i think half of those were trained in
afghanistan
so you see it coming home to roost this
is a typical
boomerang effect the other one is from
afghanistan is
the great missile buyback you know about
that one
no well in the early 80s the
cia gave about 1 000 stinger missiles
to the mujahideen those were the
anti-communist forces backed by the
united
states and pakistan and so forth
they used about i think they used about
250 250 of them so there were 750 left
over
and those are pretty sophisticated well
they are shoulder fired heat seeking
and they were the missiles that that
turned the balance against the soviets
or that has made the cost so high in
terms of lost helicopters and jets and
so forth
that they had second thoughts about
continuing in afghanistan it was very
effective
but they only used about 250 of them i
think that's the figure that
sticks in my mind i've got it on paper
somewhere
but that meant there were 750 left to
get back
and naturally agency said we'll take
things back thank you
and the afghanistan we're keeping them
together and so they disappeared
and bush when he was president i think
it was 91
1991 maybe both years he had to take
tens of millions of dollars from his
special contingency fund
and give it to the cia for buying them
back in the armed bazaars all over the
place out there
where they were selling them they know
that the iranians got some
and the the thought of course is the
danger and the threat
is that they're going to shoot down an
american airliner
or two with these with these missiles
and so then then
carter not no not carter but clinton
getting my presidents mixed up
clinton harold they're all the same
uh clinton then in the summer of his
first year in office which have been 93
he also had to put up 40 million or
something like that
to give the cia especially to buy back
these missiles
and it's i haven't read yet how many
they've been able to buy back but
they've got their people running around
from one market to another to another
trying to trying to get in as many as
possible and that's the sort of
sort of thing you run into when you get
involved with these
kinds of people
i don't think they'll ever probably get
them all back because
some are in the hands of the iranians
but if they were so naive
naive as to think they could go to these
mujahideen in afghanistan
high fellas we'll take the missiles back
would you please there's a final
question
people say well we need the cia other
people say we don't need the cia some
people say well the cia should be
disbanded because it's
hands are so bloody but we do need to
replace it with something else what's
your opinion on
the need for an intelligence agency well
first let me say that you know there are
committees
on different levels looking into the
current and future role of the whole
united states intelligence community
because there's something like 12
organizations of which the cia is only
one
and they spend 28 billion dollars i
think is the
accepted figure for the overall
community budget of which the cia
gets about 3 billion and so there's a
lot of money involved and there is a
joint
white house senate committee which les
aspen was heading until he died
they are to report in the coming months
i think the house of representatives has
another
committee going on it groups outside
government like the 20th century fund
are also
making their own studies think tanks in
other words and so
it's a it's a period of transition and
they are trying to come up with what
the structure and the missions of the
intelligence organizations should be and
i think it's realistic to to say that
yes we do need an intelligence service
of some sort
there are legitimate targets out there
which have to be
have to be taken into account i'm
thinking of international terrorism i'm
thinking of the international narcotics
trade
i'm thinking of the problem of the
proliferation of nuclear
nuclear weapons and chemical and
biological weapons mass destruction in
other words
and uh others so i think that there is
certainly a need for an intelligence
service and organization
no matter what you call it it doesn't
have to be called the cia
and the moynihan plan of dividing the
cia between the pentagon and the state
department
that still could could be a solution but
we'll still have to have
some clandestine collection and the
point all these years has been to
use intelligence collection to prevent
war especially by out
by accident or miscalculation and that
was very important with this
soviet standoff you know well i think
that
the most important things that should be
changed
and i don't have any hope right now of
changing these things
but the most egregious activities
are the subversion and overthrow of
democratically elected civilian
governments
and their replacement with military
dictatorships of the highly repressive
type that
institutionalize torture and disappear
people and so forth
that is one thing that we should really
try to eliminate because it's a disgrace
on the united states
the cia's support to murderous security
services around the world
is another area that really should be
looked into and these most recent
revelations on guatemala
and the cia connections with the
murderers of the american michael devine
and the
husband of jennifer harbury the american
lawyer
that is indication that these types of
support to
the security services continuing and it
it was happening from the 50s on i was
involved in those
those activities myself in the 60s those
have got to be stopped
and then
the i would say the um the third
area that really should be looked into
is the general area of covered
intervention in the affairs of other
countries
and not just overthrow but to to try to
control and manipulate their
institutions of power
whether it be the press or whether it be
women's organizations or whatever
and so these are my this is my wish list
but i don't have the slightest hope that
it's going to happen because
i think that all these cia activities
are a product of the domestic
system in the united states and until we
change the domestic system in the united
states
uh reordering the power structure here
then these things are going to go on
because they are needed by a very few
in this country few and powerful
interests
and they relate very closely to the
operations of multinationals
abroad u.s based multinationals abroad
but it is a period of transition right
now
in the world at large it is the largest
in the most important period of
transition since the late 1940s and
early 50s it's only a window of
opportunity
decisions are going to be made now about
the use of the intelligence services and
a lot of other
international priorities and domestic
priorities in the united states and i
think that everybody who is concerned
should be involved in this but not alone
in concert with others because an
individual as in the trade union
movement you know an individual worker
has no power at all
he can be fired and replaced at will but
if
you workers unite and a trade union with
strength then they have power
and the same thing goes in the political
scene or a cultural scene or whatever
else
other sector you may speak of and so
that's why it's so important for people
to be involved
in groups the group of choice and there
are many activities out there to be
engaged in such as solidarity
with cuba to try to break down that
blockade of 35 years
or with guatemala so there is something
out there for everyone
and we only have ourselves to blame if
we don't
take action now on our next alternative
views we'll hear the concluding
hour of our two-part series of our
interview with former cia
officer phil agee we urge you to join us
it's going to be fascinating
but that brings us to the end of this
hour of alternative
views
frequently hear from viewers who request
a list of news publications which we use
on alternative views
and also a reading list for u.s power
structure in the mass media
if you would like to have these send a
stamped
self-addressed envelope to the
alternative
information network po box 7279 austin
texas
seven eight seven one three you must
send a
self-addressed stamped envelope
we would like to acknowledge the
assistance of the people that
helped us make our program possible
jamie otis is making a
documentary about the cia this film
features uh phil agee in it and jamie's
the one who
was the facilitator for getting us our
interview with phil agee
the texas student television group
provided the facilities
and the crew we really appreciate the
help of our director steve khan
he was assisted by his technical
director marty harris
the camera people were tony broomer
sabrina tubio
and tommy kaiser we also appreciate the
help of don cooper
who was the escort for philip a.g
alternative views is a production of the
alternative information network
po box 7279 austin texas
so that's our address if you'd like to
write to us
and be sure to join us on our next
program when we have the concluding hour
in our two-part series of an interview
with ex-cia officer
phil agee goodbye